Securing Egress Traffic with kgateway, Istio Ambient Mesh, and Kyverno: LFX Mentorship Blog (#453)
kgateway-dev/kgateway.dev: content/blog/egress-traffic-with-kgateway-and-Istio-integration.md

## kgateway's integration with Ambient Mesh
kgateway integrates to Ambient Mesh for managing our workloads through Layer 4 and Layer 7 network policies. But the thing that sets its apart from other Gateway solutions is that, Kgateway is the first project that can be used as a pluggable waypoint for Istio. 
Kgateway has been built on same Envoy engine that Istio’s waypoint implementation uses, which has certain features including Istio API Compatability, Shared Observability, Faster Adoption of Security Featrues and Unified Configurational Model with Ambient Mesh.

## Istio Authorization Policy for zero trust. Cover the difference of L4 vs. L7 auth policies
<!-- Differences between Layer 4 and Layer 7 policies to cover how do they effect our workloads under Ingress and Egress Traffic.
-->
# How important is kgateway's integration
While Istio ambient provides Authorization, Authentication and Egress still, there are several scenarios where kgateway can offer a more powerful alternative:

> ## Securely Egress Traffic with kGateway + Istio Integration

Reviewer: See Lin's section: https://kgateway.dev/blog/extend-istio-ambient-kgateway-waypoint/#see-it-in-action

---
title: "Egress Traffic with kgateway and Istio Integration"
toc: 
author: Aryan Parashar
excludeSearch: 
---

> Istio Ambient Mesh is a sidecar-less data plane model designed to reduce operational overhead and improve resource efficiency for service-to-service communication. Instead of using per-pod sidecar proxies, Ambient splits its data plane into two layers:

Reviewer 2: I think the blog also needs a story at the beginning that outlines the issue (aka why you want an egress gateway in for LLMs), what are the most common issues, and how kgateway together with Istio can solve this. the focus is too much on ambient and not so much on the use case itself

> Istio Ambient Mesh is a sidecar-less data plane model designed to reduce operational overhead and improve resource efficiency for service-to-service communication. Instead of using per-pod sidecar proxies, Ambient splits its data plane into two layers:

Author: Restructured the Blog as per your instructions!

This separation lets platform teams choose when L7 processing is necessary, reducing cost and computational overhead for workloads that only require transport security.

## kgateway's integration with Ambient Mesh
kgateway integrates to Ambient Mesh for managing our workloads through Layer 4 and Layer 7 network policies. But the thing that sets its apart from other Gateway solutions is that, Kgateway is the first project that can be used as a pluggable waypoint for Istio. 
Kgateway has been built on same Envoy engine that Istio’s waypoint implementation uses, which has certain features including Istio API Compatability, Shared Observability, Faster Adoption of Security Featrues and Unified Configurational Model with Ambient Mesh.

# How important is kgateway's integration
Before integrating kagteway with Istio Ambient, ensure we have: 
1. Set-up `kind` cluster.
2. Setup Kuberntes Gateway API:
   ```
   kubectl apply --server-side -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.4.0/experimental-install.yaml
   ```
4. Follow the [Get started guide](https://kgateway.dev/docs/latest/quickstart/) to install kgateway.

> 5. Follow the [Sample app guide](https://kgateway.dev/docs/latest/install/sample-app/) to create a gateway proxy with an HTTP listener and deploy the httpbin sample app.

Reviewer: I think ServiceEntries aren't supported for agentgateway yet, so let's call out you can also use agentgateway for more advanced LLM routing use-cases. I guess we could also change the example in this blog to not use ollama (and use a simple httpbin example instead), then in the next blog use ollama with the AI Backend type and agentgateway.

6. Set up an ambient mesh in your cluster to secure service-to-service communication with mutual TLS by following the [ambientmesh.io](https://ambientmesh.io/docs/quickstart/) quickstart documentation.
7. Deploy the Ollama Container at port number 11434, binding to 0.0.0.0 so the Kubernetes virtual machine can access it via the host's bridge network.
   ```
   docker run -d -v ollama:/root/.ollama -p 11434:11434 -e OLLAMA_HOST=0.0.0.0 ollama/ollama --name ollama-server
   ```
8. Get the Container IP of ollama which will be inserted at all the **`address filds` which is 172.17.0.2 in our case.
   ```
   docker inspect -f '{{range .NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' ollama-server
   ```
9. Deploy the Kyverno Authz Server is a GRPC server capable of processing Envoy External Authorization requests.
```
helm install kyverno-authz-server --namespace default --create-namespace --wait \
  --version 0.1.0 --repo https://kyverno.github.io/kyverno-envoy-plugin \
  kyverno-authz-server
```

While Istio ambient provides Authorization, Authentication and Egress still, there are several scenarios where kgateway can offer a more powerful alternative:

> ## Securely Egress Traffic with kGateway + Istio Integration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Secure egress traffic with kgateway and ambient mesh
```

> To establish a dedicated, policy-enforced egress path, we must combine three core resources: the **Istio ServiceEntry** (to register the external host), the **kGateway Egress Gateway** (to serve as the L7 egress waypoint), and the **HTTPRoute** (to apply the routing and security logic).

Reviewer 2: I think we should maybe remove the word waypoint from here, because it is not using a waypoint gateway class

> * Our target is an external Ollama container running on the host machine (host.docker.internal) on the default port 11434 and `ServiceEntries` injects the external Ollama endpoint into the Istio service registry for which we'll use static resolution for our local Docker Desktop bridge.

Reviewer 2: it is generally not clear to me why it has to be a ServiceEntry and cannot just be a kgateway-native Backend. what benefit does ambient and the istio serviceentry bring here?

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
# ollama-serviceentry.yaml - Using DNS for Reliability
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: ollama-external-host
  namespace: default
  labels:
    security.corp/egress-approved: "true"
spec:
  hosts:
  - "host.docker.internal"
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  ports:
  - number: 11434
    name: http-ollama
    protocol: HTTP
  resolution: DNS
---

# egress-kgateway.yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: egress-kgateway
  namespace: default
spec:
  gatewayClassName: kgateway
  listeners:
    - protocol: HTTP
      port: 8080
      name: http
      allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: All
---

# ollama-egress-route.yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: ollama-egress-route
  namespace: default 
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: egress-kgateway
    sectionName: http
  hostnames:
  - "host.docker.internal"
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: ollama-external-host
      port: 11434
      kind: ServiceEntry
      group: "networking.istio.io"

> EOF

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to show that you can route to ollama through the egress gateway here. you can then later show how you limit access to ollama with the authz policies

Reviewer: I realized we're also missing the step to add kgateway to the Istio mesh and make sure `curl-test-client` is also in the mesh

          names: ["ollama-external-host"]
    validate:
      message: "External ServiceEntries must include the label 'security.corp/egress-approved: true' to ensure policy review."
      pattern:
        metadata:
          labels:
            security.corp/egress-approved: "?*"
EOF
```
# See it in Action/ Testing

To test the security policies applied by kGateway, we use a simple Pod named curl-test-client. Its primary role is to serve as the mesh-enabled client that originates the outbound traffic, allowing us to test Layer 4 security (mTLS) and Layer 7 policies (CEL RBAC/ExtAuth). It is labeled for Ambient Mesh enrollment.

```YAML
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: curl-test-client
  namespace: default
  labels:
    app: curl-client
    istio.io/dataplane-mode: ambient
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: curl-client
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: curl-client
        istio.io/dataplane-mode: ambient
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: client
        image: curlimages/curl
        command: ["sleep", "3600"] 
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
EOF
```

# Testinig Client

> We will use the client app to execute tests against the host.docker.internal via the kGateway path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use the client app that we previously deployed to execute tests against the `host.docker.internal` domain through the kgateway egress gateway.
```

Authorized Test (With Required Header)
This test should be allowed because the header x-force-authorized: true satisfies the Kyverno Envoy AuthorizationPolicy. The traffic is then proxied by kGateway to the Ollama container.
```sh
kubectl exec -it deploy/curl-test-client -n default -- curl http://egress-kgateway.default:8080/ -v -H "Host: host.docker.internal" -H "x-force-authorized: true"
```

Expected Output:
```sh
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...
Ollama is running%
```

> ### Testing Resiliency: Proving the Retry Policy Works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Verify retry policies on the Kyverno server
```

> While the TrafficPolicy defines the retry logic (attempts: 3, on 503 or 504), we must prove that the kGateway's Envoy proxy actually executes the retries when an upstream service fails. We will simulate an upstream connection failure by temporarily pausing the external Ollama container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the TrafficPolicy defines the retry logic (attempts: 3, on 503 or 504), we must prove that the kgateway egress gateway actually executes the retries when an upstream service fails. We will simulate an upstream connection failure by temporarily pausing the external Ollama container.
```

```sh
# Pause the container that is running the external Ollama service
docker pause ollama-server
echo "Ollama container is paused. Proceeding to send request..."
kubectl exec -it deploy/curl-test-client -n default -- curl http://egress-kgateway.default:8080/ -v -H "Host: host.docker.internal" -H "x-force-authorized: true"
```

> Send a request. kgateway will try three times (as configured by attempts: 3 in the TrafficPolicy) before ultimately failing and returning a 5xx error to the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Send a request. Because the Ollama service is paused, kgateway retries the request three times (as configured by `attempts: 3` in the TrafficPolicy) before ultimately failing and returning a 5xx error to the client.
```

Then we retrieve the logs from the kGateway Envoy proxy pod. We look for the final access log entry, which must contain the URX and UF flags to prove the retries occurred.

```sh
# Get the pod name for the egress-kgateway
KGW_POD=$(kubectl get pods -n default -l gateway.networking.k8s.io/gateway-name=egress-kgateway -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')

# View the last request log entry
kubectl logs $KGW_POD -n default | grep 'POST /api/generate' | tail -n 1
```
With inspecting the logs (again similar to the docs example) you should see something like:
```
{
  "response_flags": "URX,UF",
  "upstream_transport_failure_reason": "delayed connect error: Connection refused",
  "attempt_count": 2
}
```
# Demo

[Demo](https://youtu.be/5PegECeu0v0)

> {{< youtube 5PegECeu0v0 >}}

Reviewer 2: not sure if we typically mention other relevant blogs that people can explore??

Reviewer: I think we can upload the video to the kgateway youtube! @linsun do you have permissions for the youtube account?
